The next one is what we
call polymorphic behavior,
right, or inline caching,
or property reads.
In other words,
if you're reading a property on an object,
and we do that a lot,
right, it could be fast.
In other words, it could take almost
instant to up to 60 times slower.
This is not 60%,
this is 60X slower, right?
So there's a huge difference in
performance between a fast path and
an unhappy path.
So let's see what the test looks like.
And then let's see what's actually
happening under the hood.
But actually before I do that,
we need to talk about,
how does a VM layout object, right?
So we talked about the physical machine.
And the reason I talked
about the physical machine,
because I wanna tie it to how
VMs actually work internally.
And so
let's talk about how VMs layout an array.
So let's say you do something
very simple and you say,
myArray 1, 4, a bunch of numbers into it.
And then you wanna access
the array using some index, right?
So the way this would translate is that,
well, VM would, inside of the data
section, would create array with
different values inside of it, right?
And you can think of it as an object,
right?
So this object at the location 0
would have a special hiddenClassId.
I'll explain it in a second.
It needs to know about a prototype chain.
We can talk about it later.
It will have a pointer to an actual
array which is stored somewhere else.
The reason why it's stored somewhere
else is because arrays can grow in size,
but your reference to
the array stays the same.
So in other words,
there has to be a level of indirection.
I cannot give you a reference to a memory
location that later I decide is too small
for me to store the value.
And then I will have to go back and
somehow change all the pointers,
which is kind of nonsensical, right?
So instead, I give you a pointer
to an intermediary object.
And that intermediary object will
point to the actual location.
Now I'm free to allocate more or
less stuff.
Now, not only that, if you ask for
an array of three, I'm not gonna
create an array of three, because
chances are, you're gonna push into it.
And so I'm gonna create a bigger array.
And if I don't use it, I don't use it,
I'm gonna waste a little bit of time.
But then if you push stuff into it,
I won't have to copy the array
every single time you push into it.
So I'm always gonna allocate a little
more so that pushes can be fast.
And every once in a while, you're gonna
overblow my optimistic guess, that's fine.
I'll copy it into a new
location where I have space.
I'll copy all the values, I'll update
the pointer and make everybody happy.
And finally, I'm gonna keep the actual
length property in the system so
that I know what the actual length is,
because the thing I actually
store is typically bigger.
And yeah.
>> In other languages where you have
to specify the length of an array and
it can't really change, is it following
that same system of Java, for example?
>> I don't believe you can
have a fixed array in Java.
I think in Java you can
specify initial array size.
I don't believe you can have a fixed one.
But different languages can
choose different things.
I don't know what other languages will
do because there's bajillion different
languages.
These are the choices that
typically are made, but
doesn't mean that everybody has
to make these choices, right?
I believe, I don't know,
I'm not an expert in Rust.
But I would imagine that Rust would
probably have an array that is fixed size
because that would kind of make sense.
But I'm purely speculating and
guessing, so I don't know.
Okay, so what is this hiddenClassId?
This contains a internal data structure
that the VM uses for different tricks.
We'll talk about it later in it, but
basically there is more
stuff that VM needs to know.
In order to make these things work,
we're gonna keep setting
internal data structure.
And what's interesting about it is that
the pointer to the internal data structure
is always the first thing in an array,
right?
So if you think about these objects in
memory, you can think of it as in like,
it's just a contiguous
block of memory somewhere.
And as long as I have a pointer
to the beginning of the memory,
I know how much offset I
need to get into it, and
therefore I know what to read out of it,
right?
And so to perform the operation like
reading a particular value out of memory,
a simplified version, not the real thing,
simplified version in terms
of instruction would be like,
you load the address of
the myRawArray into the A0.
You load the someIndex into AE0, and
then you perform the read operation.
This is what's happening underneath
in the physical machine, right?
And as you can see,
this is a pretty straightforward thing,
it's easy to map these things through,
and CPUs are pretty good at accessing it.
And even though the arrays in JavaScript
are more complicated versions
of memory access in CPU, there's
enough similarities where you're like,
yeah, I can see how that maps
pretty neatly over, right?
There is couple of levels
of indirections in there.
There might be, this is incorrect
because it has to do a check.
It has to check the size of someIndex
to make sure you're not reading past
the length of the array, etc.
So this is simplified code here.
But fundamentally, that maps pretty
cleanly to what the CPU does internally.
And because it maps cleanly, I am going
to argue that VMs are extremely, sorry,
arrays, for the most part,
some exceptions we'll talk about later,
are extremely predictable in
terms of the performance, right?
The way you access things in an array,
it's gonna be pretty fast and predictable.
There isn't gonna be surprise,
surprise, all of a sudden you're slow.
I'll show you a bunch of examples later
where, surprise, you're slow, in here.
So the way this works, right,
is as long as the someIndex is
between 0 and the length value here,
the operation is extremely fast because
all you do is load a 0 into here,
load the offset into AE0, and
then read the value and you're done.
So it's extremely fast operations.
So what do we do with objects?
And this is where things get complicated.
So at this point, hopefully I'm
convincing or I'm kind of getting you to
understand that everything on a physical
machine is just an array access, right?
CPUs are good at that.
They have index registers.
They know how to do index plus offset.
It's just a memory access
in terms of array.
Okay, so let's say we are going to do now
a object which has a person and
a name, right?
And if you think about it,
an object is really just an array,
except that instead of number indices,
you have names, right?
And then you can just say person.name.
Okay, so what happens underneath?
What happens underneath is that
when you wanna create a person,
what you do is,
you create actually two separate object.
One is this hidden class,
which the VA calls hidden classes.
I don't know why they're called hidden
classes, but that's what it's called.
It's an internal data structure that you
as a developer do not have access to.
There's nothing you can
do to peek into it.
And the way to think about it,
this is not actually how the VM stores it.
But for the simplicity sake,
the way to think about it is,
let's say that the hidden
array is just a index,
it's just an array with
the strings inside of it.
So that when you store the actual person,
you will create an array that
contains the first location is always
gonna be the hidden class, and
then you store the values.
In this case,
you will store Jack and 30, right?
And now if you wanna do person.name,
what you actually gonna
do is you're gonna say,
I know that the zeroeth location is always
the special thing reserved for me, right?
So I know it's safe to do person 0.
And I know it's an array of strings.
Again, the actual relation's
a little more complicated.
And therefore, I can basically do the
equivalent of, give me the indexOf name.
And so in this case, it runs through the
index and it says, name is on location 1.
And so
now you can use that to access the person.
And now you get a person lookup.
Now looking at this,
you should be going like, really?
That's what's going on under the hood.
This seems awfully inefficient.
Yes, that is what's
going on under the hood.
Now there's couple of differences.
First of all,
the indexOf is a linear search.
The actual implementation
is more of a hash.
And so it's a fixed cost,
not a linear search.
But bearing the difference,
fundamentally, this is what's going on.
Now there are languages like Java or
C, etc,
where this lookup,
this conversion of a property
to an offset can be done
during compile time.
So if you have a static
languages where the shape of
objects is known ahead of time,
like C or Java,
then you can do this
translation at compile time.
And therefore, you know how things
point ahead of time, and so
this operation becomes inexpensive.
JavaScript is not one of those languages,
because JavaScript is dynamic.
You can create new properties all
the time to change things etc, etc, etc.
Okay, so this is expensive,
and this is slow.
What can a VM do to make this faster?
Okay, before we actually go to this,
let's talk about a second scenario.
Second scenario is, let's say I have
two objects, person1 and person2.
And Jack was 30, now let's add Mary, 28.
Notice that the two objects
share their hidden class.
I didn't create two separate
hidden classes, it's the same one.
And the terminology we use is that the
shape of these two objects is the same.
And this will matter later, okay?
So the shape of person1 and
the shape of person2 is the same thing.
And so what you end up with are two
arrays which store the underlying data,
with their hidden classes
pointing to the internal
data structure that describes
the shape of the object, okay?
So that's what's happening under the hood.
And you can see that doesn't matter
whether you pass in person1 or
person2 in this location.
The right thing will happen in here.
Because you're just looking up the index,
in this case,
both of them have the same exact index,
will both return 1.
And so whether you're using person1 or
person2,
you know that the name is on
the location 1 inside of the array.
>> So another hidden class isn't
created cuz they have the same shape?
>> Right, it should basically now
show the next thing which is,
what happens if the hidden
class is different?
Another situation where,
let's say you would reverse the order,
you would say age first and
then the name, or you would say,
maybe there is another property
called children or whatever.
The moment you have
an additional property,
you have a different shape, right?
And the moment you have a different shape,
you have to create a new hidden class.
And the weird thing in JavaScript is that
the hidden classes can actually change.
So you can have an object that has
a hidden class, and just by adding
a property onto it, you can transition
it to a new hidden class, right?
And the VM is pretty good about
tracking the transitions.
So as long as you add
the properties in the same order,
that hidden class transitions
will be the same,
and you will end up in
the same shape of the object.
So from the perspective
of the virtual machine,
it's gonna be the same exact thing.
>> Do you ever lose
the original hidden class?
>> Even in terms of memory pressure?
>> Just in terms of being
able to access it again.
>> I don't know, I believe that original
versions of V8, this is my speculation,
could be wrong.
I believe the original versions of
V8 did not release hitting classes
as the application ran, and so
it was possible to run out of memory.
I believe the newer versions are smart
enough to release the old hitting classes
that I no longer use.
But don't quote me on this,
I am not 100% Sure.
>> Is there a difference in
methods of making objects then,
like object literal versus create or
something?
>> No, but the thing you should be
thinking about, we'll talk about it later,
now next is,
the way you create the object matters.
And so it probably is a good idea to
have a single dedicated function for
creating the object so that you
can guarantee that no matter which
code path you take,
you end up with the same hidden class.
That's one thing.
The other thing that's a good idea is
to don't add properties after the fact.
So if you have a property that may or
may not be there,
just make it and
set it to undefined, right?
Because that allocates the space for
it and gives it a hidden class.
And then later on when you read into
the property, you're not going to be
transitioning the object to a different
hidden class or anything like that.
So in general,
a good rule of thumb is, always
Have a single place where you
allocate the function, the object.
So have a factory function or
something like that.
And the second good rule is, always
initialize all the possible properties.
So one of the things I tell people is,
in TypeScript you can say,
property question mark equals
whatever I say, don't do that.
Say, property colon, undefined, or
whatever value you want, right?
Because that one says, you have to have
this property, it just might be undefined.
Versus the question mark says, you may or
may not have this property, right?
It's a minor thing.
In many cases it doesn't matter,
but sometimes it does, yes?
>> So this applies to classes and
class constructors as well?
And then constructor?
>> Yes.
>> Adding every property,
setting it to undefined?
>> Yes, so if you have a class and a class
constructor, the good rule of thumb would
be to initialize all
the properties ahead of time.
If you can initialize it to actual value,
great.
If not, initialize it to undefined,
and then set the property later.
Because underneath it all,
there's gonna be a storm of hidden classes
that will be happening,
and you wanna avoid that.
The thing that the VM can do is
that when it's running a function,
within that function, it can see all
the operations that you're doing.
And therefore, it knows that, I know
if I come in with this hidden class,
by the time all the operations are done,
the class that gonna exit is
either this class or that class.
And so all the, if you've read property
A and then you've read a property B and
property C, is not like the VM is, okay,
hidden class A, B, and then C, right?
It knows how to co-locate it
all together and be like, okay,
you go from here to there, and
then do all the other operations together.
So in general, it's a good idea to
put everything together in a single
function where the optimizer can
look at it and be like, right, so
you're just gonna add the six
properties now to the object.
Therefore I'm gonna transition from here
to here, and then add the properties.